Created: Apr 14, 2021 3:34 PM
Edited: Apr 25, 2021 9:17 AM

In the JavaScript world technologies move fast. JavaScript technologies are being develop constantly to solve all sorts of problems in software development, resulting in a lot of JavaScript libraries and frameworks along with their evolving APIs. If you are a JavaScript developer it can be overwhelming and uncomfortable if you are not keeping up with the industry even if the company you are working for is using stable but outdated JavaScript technologies.

I have felt this discomfort and uneasiness the entire first year of my career as a freelance developer. After learning React, Redux and Node and building a fullstack project, I was proud until after I started discovering technologies and new APIs that most developer blog says "you should use this" or "this company is using this" or "this new API will solve this". I should be proud of myself for completing a fullstack project but for some reason I felt discouraged of all the things I don't know and insecure about my skills as a developer.

They say that consistent effort makes one competent which leads to confidence so I did just that. First, I ignored the advice of some developers to be good enough in JavaScript and get really good in your choice of framework. While that may work for some it did not work for me since it did not give me the confidence that I want. I've learned enough JS and did some awesome work on React, Redux, and Node but after all that for some reason I fear the unknown or the knowledge or frameworks or concept that I do not know.

So I did the work consistently and really learn JavaScript and the its ecosystem. In my journey, I have discovered holes in my knowledge I did not know exist. I've discovered the JS engine, the thread, the event loop, the callback que and how they all work together, the execution scope and the quirkiness of "this" keyword, the difference between browser and Node platforms where JS runs, the backpack or the closure and what JS function can really do, the expressiveness of the JS language and functional Programming paradigm and more. Doing so, the discomfort ease down little by little. I can't say its gone but my attitude towards JS fast evolving nature changed from dread to curiosity and excitement but of course with a little bit of anxiety.

With React and, at that time, its new Hooks API I started asking why instead of learning the how. I know how props and state works. I know how to implement patterns such as HOC and render props and know how to implement context and hooks API but I've discovered that knowing the whys is much more important.

You can forget the hows since it's easy to forget them anyway and a quick look at the docs is enough to get you going. But knowing the whys is much more important because the answers to these questions are what you need to know at the start of problem solving or building a feature.

For example, why does props exists? or state? Why does HOC or render props exist? Hooks?

Props exists to make component composable since component are basically a function that takes inputs to modify their behaviors or outputs. How about state? State or specifically local component state exist so that we can persist a component change in behavior through out its lifetime until it's unmounted or taken off the DOM. If we do not have state then how can we react to anything like a click or any event that could happen in your app. Imagine if your face does not have any state. You can't smile or laugh. What happens then when a funny event happens in front of you and you can't react to it. That would be weird and the world would be really boring since there is no emotional interaction just like an app without state which meaning a user of the app can only look at it and cannot interact with it. Knowing both these fundamental knowledge, I can further think about solutions to the problems I'm trying to solve such as how can I compose components to achieve code maintaibility and redability.

How about HOC, render props, and Hooks API? Maybe I'll answer these questions on my next post.

In conclusion, knowing well about the JS language and its ecosystem enable be to not sweat upcoming new JS technologies because I know I can read and speak the language fluently making it easier to understand frameworks or APIs. When I learn new technologies or APIs I try to understand their use cases or why are they created and what problems do they solve. I don't worry too much about the details or implementation because that's what documentations are for where you can refer to them anytime.
